### Last actual lecture! - Whats important? Repetion of HMM

Central dogma

dna -> rna -> protein

task -> colour seq according to functions

HMM work really well for DNA and AA

Dna seq are ordner, good for HMM

tons of training data for HMM to get good!

Markov is called as such since next stae depends only on current state

question -> predict transmembrane proteins

### RNA SECONDARY STRUCT wow

rna can do some fancy stuff and turn into tRNA which helps ribosomes

rna is single strand, but they wanna like curl up and chillout with itself, basically find comlemantary base pair stuff 


AACGGGCCTT

AU

those end AA and TT want to connect, now rna is a circle

we form hydrogen bonds, make a cool 3 object with twisting 

### HOW

make a scoring system, freq of nuceltoide in each pos indivudially and also we gotta get the sequence match in there too

4 letters -> 8 pairs

Look at this correlation

so even if the rna is very different, one mutation just see another mutation somewhere else to match the "rainbows"

### Energy minimization

DG_folding = DG_unfoleded - DG_folded

many possible states, but the environment also effects RNA folding!

we match base pairs, but matching pairs have different energy

Nussinoc alogirthm does this! pretttty cool

### Recusrive max of base pairing.

think of seq as set of possible subsequences

idea: arcs are always nested!

if you want to optimize whole structure, look at subsequences

find optimal for small seq, and work outwards

since the rna is netsted, the alogirthm can also be nested!! wow    

Give score from aa to another aa

we want to see pair I-J

we know score between previous pair, and the whole previous structure! 

