### Lecture 15

Hidden markov models - important algorithms

Related to sequence motifs

in seq find all occournces of motif

in motif -> find special pattern occourences

refresher ;:exons -> etrovert and expressive

--------------

func. annotation -> find special "regions"

within DNA, alternates betwene zones like cpg/promoter/exon/intron... etc

we want to find wehre different regions with diff. charchteristics are

different regions often have different sequence statistics (freq of A,C,G,T)

example: promoters are GC-rich 

example: CpG has many CG, CG, CG pairs

---------------------

freq of A,C,G,T is important! how to find such regions in dna seq?

**One state model:**

GC-rich promoter model. Prob. to observe 

P(Si | M) 

Certain base chance given certain model

--

*Basic model is*:

Each nculodetide has a % chance of occuring, some more than others

------

What can we do with model?

- Generate sequences
- Compute probability of observing a sequence 

Lets say SEQ1 = T A G C A

P(SEQ1 | M) = P(A | M) for A in SEQ1

0.13 * 0.15 * 0.30 * 0.42 * 0.13 = P(SEQ1 | M) 

------

One state model not so useful, since states will vary

So we use a **Two-state model**

WE CAN VARY:

In each pos, it can be background seq or promoter region

We want to model transitions between those two states. 

B -> B -> B -> P -> B

AAAT ........  GACCC ..... AAA

background |   promoter | background


We can use this to model the fact that dna swaps "states" but also that one you are in a state, there is a low chance to swap states.

Markov model -> P( STATE i+1 = P | STATE i = B )

state swap does not depend on the entire history, only last one

Same as for one state model, we can:

- Generate sequences (given model probabilites)
(flip a coin to decide start sequence)
- Compute probability of observing a certain sequence (sequence probability)

example:

SEQ1: B P P P B

P(SEQ1 | M) = 0.5 * 0.15 * 0.75 * 0.25

Compare different models : what is more likely ?

BUt !! here we go -> in each state (BACKGROUND / PROMOTER) we see different freq. of nucleotides


Boom now we are talking:

- Generate sequences 

    - Sample inital state B/P (coinflip)
    - Sample emitted state (% chance of ATCG)
    - Sample next B/P state (% chance of flip or stay)

- Compute probability of observing a certain sequence (sequence probability)
    - We get both STATE and NUCLEOTIDE sequence.


----------

Ok but lets find the most likely path!

STATE1, STATE2, ... STATEN hiddenstate

x1, x2, ... xn observed seq

Transition probabilities.

a_kl = P(STATE_i = l | STATE_i-1 = k)

Initial a_ok= P(STATE1 = k)

------------

P_e (i+1) = e_l (x_i +1) * Max_k [  K_v(i) a_kl  ]

Emisson and transiton are specified when we define the model.

-----------

Can be solved with dynamic programming:

Viterbi algorithm

Dynamic programming matrix:

