### Hey its nathalie again!

Prediction of 3D structure from sequence!

goal: get whole struct from one domain! (tert structure)

again, grabbing structure from protein sequence would be really cool

why ? because proteins tend to fold pretty similarily, or with structures which 

3d tert struct is also called the fold

atelast for small globular proteins, aa sequence will decide the fold. no help needed

proteins fold in a way to minmizie energy (entropy) most stable

---------------

idea:

we have models that can calculate the energy of proteins

how about we calculate all possible shapes and then find the lowest energy! -> will be the correct fold 

However, too many substructures a protein has like 10^300, would take forever to brute force all possible shapes

Also most proteins fold within micro or miliseconds! they dont explore useless folding paths

maybe we find the path and go from there! 

-----------------

### CASP - critical assesmen ot tech of prtoein prediction

everyone meet and predict proteins together and compete

contestants are given 100 protein seq. 

the proteins structure is in a safe somewhere, its structure is unknown.

contestants predict structure models, 

when contsent they open safe, compare and tada

how do they evulate predict and fasit

superimpose structures, Gobal distance test

percent of alpha Carbon in predict within 4Å of the real one

if 90% or higher score its pretty good. so 90% or more of the alpha carbons are within 4Å off its good.

up to 2016, less than half of alpha carbons were predicted correctly...

alphafold 2018 got 60%

alphafold 2 in 2020 got almost 90%!

alphafold is super op

## Trad methods for structure prediction:

**Homology modeling**

structre informarion can be transferred between homologues

structure is conserved even through aa sequence chabge

structure is more conserved than sequence.

if you have one seq and would like to find a homlog to that sequence. 

Solution: use BLAST

blast find sequecnce that resembles the sequences given as input

there is another similar seq which structure is known.

align two sequences, and thye are homolgous.

then guess structure from earlier one. 

7 steps:

1. database search, use BLAST to look for simialr seq to target seq, and they have a known structure, so now we have a similar struct

blast against the protein databank (PDB)

2. Identify template

select a sequence against e value, now we have a temple

got to beatleast 30% seq identity

quality of model depends on sequence idenitity.

3. do seq. alignment on sequences

make it as good as possible

most important step!!! wrong here messes stuff up down the line

the atom lines is most important, is the sturcture, shows atom pos

1 N-Ala Xn Yn Zn
2 C-Ala Xn Yn Zn

target  : ala-lys-pro...lys
template: ala-lys-leu...lys

target  : AKP....K....
template: AKL....K....

when finidng template struct from target struct

copy and paste from everywhere that is exact match,

but what about non-exact match?. If positions where aa is different, copy and paste coords of thebackbones only!

for insertion/deletion, hmmm what to do

if alignment is off. well then allll of the x-y cooridnates are wrong!!!

4. build model

5. add sidechains

6. optomize

7. evluate the model 

based on what we already know -> does the struct look ok?

bond length/angles/torsions/packing/surface exposure etc etc

raamachandran plot to measure pjhsi and shi angles for model and veritfy that folding is within allowed regions



----------------

### Fold databases

SCOP and CATH. 

compared all protein seq and compared to similar

we found out that there are like 1562 folds, like a lot of folding is very similar

proteins that between themselves have 30% or match, there are just 37000

total num of such folds is less than 2000. 

1562 different folds exists. allll exisiting proteins gotta fold into one of these folds

### Threading

atleast 37000 proteins that do not share any homology relationship, but they gotta fold in the same fold, even if not homlogous!

threading aka fold defintion

predict fold by fitting that sequence into every fold that exists (only 1500!) just trail and error and find lowest energy level

**two apporches** : pairwise energy based or profile based approches

put the amino acids of the targets into the fold and evulate if its fits. it gets a score either based on energy or profile, and best is chosen


### alphafold so good because:

its not himology, just one sequence and spits out a struct

uses evolution of protein sequence 

MSA is used to see conservation of protein sequence

also you see places where things are not conserved.

look at conservations across multiple sites. Indicates proximity in 3d!!! wow makes sense
cuz 3d structs over eachother need to be "touching" -> due to charges!

evolutanry pressure to keep an interaction there!!

deepmind uses this to do huge MSL alignments and find out co-evolution. put a tag on them (or ML model will learn it)

make distance maps.








